New rule: Zoomed text node is not clipped with CSS overflow (#1171)
act-rules/act-rules.github.io: _rules/zoom-text-no-overflow-clipping-59br37.md

---
id: 59br37
name: Zoomed text node is not clipped with CSS overflow
rule_type: atomic
description: |

>   This rule checks that text nodes are not unintentionally clipped by overflow, when a page is zoomed to 200% on 1280 by 1024 display;

Author: That's noted in the assumption. You're right it's an odd one. It's based on what was used as the default res for SC 1.4.11.

accessibility_requirements: # Remove whatever is not applicable
  wcag20:1.4.4: # Resize Text (AA)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_aspects:
  - DOM Tree
  - CSS Styling
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    - Wilco Fiers
  assets:
    - The Raven, poem by Edgar Allan Poe
---

## Applicability

The rule applies to any [text node][] for which all of the following is true when in a [display size][] of 640 by 512:

- The [text node][] is [visible][]; and

> - The [text node][] has an HTML element as a [parent][] in the [flat tree][]; and

Reviewer: Combining point 4 with this, will make it easier to digest the applicability around parent nodes.

Author: I think those are different cases. I'd prefer to keep them separate.

> - The [text node][] has an [ancestor][] in the [flat tree][] with the a [computed][] [overflow-x][overflow] or [overflow-y][overflow] of `none` or `clip`; and

Reviewer: Does the `getComputedStyle(node).overflow` return `clip` or `none`? The `text-overflow` does return `clip`, but not `overflow`.

Reviewer 2: `overflow-{x,y}` computes as follows:

> as specified, except with `visible`/`clip` computing to `auto`/`hidden` (respectively) if one of `overflow-x` or `overflow-y` is neither `visible` nor `clip`.

https://drafts.csswg.org/css-overflow-3/#propdef-overflow-x

`none` isn't a valid value for `overflow-{x,y}` so that should probably be fixed though.

Author: good catch. That obviously should have been "hidden" instead of "none.

- The [text node][] does not have an [ancestor][] in the [flat tree][] with an `aria-hidden` attribute set to `true`

**note**: A [display size][] of 640 by 512 is equivalent to a [display size][] of 1280 by 1024 zoomed 200%.

## Expectation

Each test target is not [clipped by overflow][clipped] of an [ancestor][] in the [flat tree][] when in a [display size][] of 640 by 512, except if the [clipping][clipped] [ancestor][] has one of the following:

- **text-overflow**: A [computed][] [white-space][] of `nowrap`, and a [computed][] [text-overflow][] that is not `clip`; or

- **line wrapping**: A [computed][] [line-height][] equal to or greater than its
  height of its [bounding box][], or in case of a [computed][] [overflow][] of `clip`, its [content box][].

## Assumptions

If any of the following assumptions is true, failing this rule may not result in a failure of [success criterion 1.4.4 Resize text](https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/#resize-text):

> - There is no other mechanism for resizing text available on the page, that can be used to resize text to 200% without loss of information or functionality. This includes font resizing in the browser, or a javascript mechanism of resizing in the page.

Reviewer 2: > This includes font resizing in the browser [...]

At first, I was a little hesitant about this bit. On second thought, I do like what this implies though; if a user cannot zoom to 200% without loss of information, it shouldn't really matter that they might instead be able to bump the base font size to 200% and not lose information.

- [Text nodes][text node] can not be [clipped by overflow][clipped] without loss of information, except for [text nodes][text node] with an [ancestor][] with `aria-hidden` set to `true`, or when specific styles have been applied to ensure text is clipped cleanly (text-overflow, line wrapping or hidden text).

- While [success criterion 1.4.4 Resize text](https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/#resize-text) does not explicitly mention which display size has to be resized up to 200%, it is assumed that a [display size][] of 1280 by 1024 is applicable. A 1280 by 1024 [display size][] is explicitly mentioned under [success criterion 1.4.10 Reflow](https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/#reflow).

## Accessibility Support

_No accessibility support issues known._

## Background

- [Understanding Success Criterion 1.4.4: Resize text](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/resize-text.html)
- [G42: Using a technology that has commonly-available user agents that support zoom](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Techniques/general/G142)

## Test Cases

### Passed

#### Passed Example 1

> This [text node][] is fully [visible][] at a [display size][] of 640 by 512.

Reviewer 3: Improve example description.
```suggestion
This [text node][] is fully [visible][] and not [clipped by overflow][clipped] of an [ancestor][] in the [flat tree][] at a [display size][] of 640 by 512.
```

> This [text node][] is fully [visible][] at a [viewport size][] of 640 by 512.

Author: Can you clarify what you mean? The browser's default stylesheet is included in the CSS spec. Obviously if a browser doesn't follow the CSS specs, its results will be different, but all browsers I know of use this default; at least where font-size is concerned they do.

> This [text node][] is fully [visible][] at a [viewport size][] of 640 by 512.

Reviewer 2: The base font size is not included in the suggested user agent styles of the HTML specification, no: https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/rendering.html. It's true that modern browsers default to a base font size of 16 pixels, but this is entirely configurable:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1174718/80476578-ddcce780-894a-11ea-9b9d-742172353433.png)

Above is a screenshot of the font settings in Chrome.

> This [text node][] is fully [visible][] at a [viewport size][] of 640 by 512.

Reviewer 4: As @kasperisager points out, the spec does not specify the base font size. Any user can configure it. When I set the base font size to 24 pixels, the text in the first passed example was clipped (so, the example should fail in that instance). This can be easily solved by setting the font-size in the div's style. 

Not relying on the default styles is similar to what we have in other rules (e.g. resetting the style of every link to make sure that default styles where being used for links when looking at distinguishing styles). 

I would be happy with a solution that sets the font-size in this example (this issue does not impact the other examples).

> This [text node][] is fully [visible][] at a [viewport size][] of 640 by 512.

Author: I don't think it's necessary, but I don't mind having font-size added to the examples, so I've done that.

```html
<div style="white-space: nowrap; overflow: hidden;">
	Once upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered, weak and weary,<br />
	Over many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten lore.<br />
	While I nodded, nearly napping, suddenly there came a tapping,<br />
	As of some one gently rapping, rapping at my chamber door.<br />
	“’Tis some visitor,” I muttered, “tapping at my chamber door.<br />
	Only this and nothing more.”
</div>
```

> #### Passed Example 2

Reviewer 3: I seems that this is a failed example even though there is a link to full poem but code it self failed the test rule. On the other hand there is not relation between the text node and link i.e. the link actually belong to the text node above.

Author: I don't think that is correct. The first exception in the expectation is true here:

> - **text-overflow**: A [computed][] [white-space][] of `nowrap`, and a [computed][] [text-overflow][] that is not `clip`; or

This [text node][] is [clipped][] using `text-overflow: ellipsis` at a [display size][] of 640 by 512. A link to a full version of the poem is also provided.

```html
<div style="white-space: nowrap; overflow: hidden; text-overflow: ellipsis;">
	Once upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered, weak and weary, Over many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten
	lore. While I nodded, nearly napping, suddenly there came a tapping.
</div>
<a href="/test-assets/59br37/poem.html">Full text of the poem</a>
```

#### Passed Example 3

> This [text node][] is [clipped][] using `text-overflow: ellipsis` at a [display size][] of 640 by 512. A link to a full version of the poem is also provided.

Reviewer 3: This description is duplicate of Passed example 2 and `text-overflow: ellipsis` is not presented in the  example code.

<div class="wordClip">
	Once upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered, weak and weary, Over many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten
	lore. While I nodded, nearly napping, suddenly there came a tapping.
</div>
<a href="/test-assets/59br37/poem.html">Full text of the poem</a>
```

#### Passed Example 4

This [text node][] is not [clipped][] with `overflow: hidden` because it has a parent with `overflow: auto` at a [viewport size][] of 640 by 512.

```html
<div style="overflow: hidden; height: 2em;">
	<div style="overflow: auto; height: 2em;">
		Once upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered, weak and weary, Over many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten
		lore. While I nodded, nearly napping, suddenly there came a tapping.
	</div>
</div>
```

### Failed

#### Failed Example 1

This [text node][] is [clipped][] because it has a fixed height that does not leave enough space for the content to wrap.

```html
<div style="overflow: hidden; height: 1.5em;">
	Once upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered, weak and weary, Over many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten
	lore. While I nodded, nearly napping, suddenly there came a tapping.
</div>
```

#### Failed Example 2

> This [text node][] is [clipped][] because its height is relative to the viewport height, leaving insufficient space for the page to be zoomed to 200% at a [viewport size][] of 640 by 512.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This [text node][] is [clipped][] because its height is relative to the viewport height, leaving insufficient space for the page to be zoomed to 200% at a [viewport size][] of 1280 by 1024.
```

---
id: 59br37
name: Zoomed text node is not clipped with CSS overflow
rule_type: atomic
description: |
  This rule checks that text nodes are not unintentionally clipped by overflow, when a page is zoomed to 200% on 1280 by 1024 viewport;
accessibility_requirements: # Remove whatever is not applicable
  wcag20:1.4.4: # Resize Text (AA)
    forConformance: true
    failed: not satisfied
    passed: further testing needed
    inapplicable: further testing needed
input_aspects:
  - DOM Tree
  - CSS Styling
acknowledgments:
  authors:
    - Wilco Fiers
  citations:
    - The Raven, poem by Edgar Allan Poe
---

## Applicability

The rule applies to any [text node][] for which all of the following is true when in a [viewport size][] of 640 by 512:

- The [text node][] is [visible][]; and
- The [text node][] has an HTML element as a [parent][] in the [flat tree][]; and
- The [text node][] has an [ancestor][] in the [flat tree][] with a [computed][] [overflow-x][overflow] or [overflow-y][overflow] of `hidden` or `clip`; and

> - The [text node][] does not have an [ancestor][] in the [flat tree][] with an `aria-hidden` attribute set to `true`

Reviewer 5: I don't understand why this condition is needed. The SC and the rule seems to be concerned with sighted users more than AT users, and they will essentially make no difference between `aria-hidden` subtrees and the rest.

Why is it "OK" to clip a text if it is `aria-hidden`?

Author: This is to avoid false positives. I'll rephrase the second assumption to make this clearer.

Reviewer 5: I fail to find a false positive caused by `aria-hidden="true"` 😞 
Can you provide me one?

Author: For example a site that uses ASCII art for something decorative. If it's decorative, SC 1.1.1 requires it be marked up with aria-hidden=true, so that it can be ignored by AT. Since it's decorative, it matter if it's clipped, so keyboard accessibility isn't necessary either.

	“’Tis some visitor,” I muttered, “tapping at my chamber door.<br />
	Only this and nothing more.”
</div>
```

#### Failed Example 3

This [text node][] is [clipped][] by style that is applied at a [viewport size][] width of 640.

```html
<style>
	@media screen and (max-width: 640px) {
		.myContainer {
			height: 1.5em;
			width: 50%;
			overflow: hidden;
			font-size: 16px;
		}
	}
</style>
<div class="myContainer">
	Once upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered, weak and weary, Over many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten
	lore. While I nodded, nearly napping, suddenly there came a tapping, As of some one gently rapping, rapping at my
	chamber door. “’Tis some visitor,” I muttered, “tapping at my chamber door. Only this and nothing more.”
</div>
```

### Inapplicable

#### Inapplicable Example 1

This [text node][] is not [visible][] at a [viewport size][] of 640 by 512.

```html
<p style="display:none;">Last updated 2020/03/27 10:52pm</p>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 2

This [text node][] has an SVG element as a [parent][].

```html
<svg>
	<text x="0" y="15">I love SVG!</text>
</svg>
```

#### Inapplicable Example 3

> This [text node][] has an [ancestor][] with `overflow: auto`.

Reviewer 5: Comparing with Passed Example 4, this one is inapplicable due to "no ancestor with `overflow: hidden` or `clip`.
Both this one and Passed Example 4 have an ancestor with `overflow: auto`, it is not the reason why the example is inapplicable.

Author: I don't understand this comment. This is inapplicable because it has no ancestor with `overflow: hidden`, passed example 4 does.

Reviewer 5: > This is inapplicable because it has no ancestor with `overflow: hidden`, passed example 4 does.

Yes, precisely.
The description here only tells about having "an ancestor with `overflow: auto`", suggesting that this is the reason why the example is inapplicable.
As you point out, the reason why this example is inapplicable is that "it has no ancestor with `overflow: hidden`" (or `clip` to keep the applicability wording). This is what the example description should state.
```suggestion
This [text node][] has no [ancestor][] with `overflow: hidden` or `clip`.
```
